[SWOOSH]
[HIGH-PITCHED TONES]
[DRAMATIC MUSIC]
[DARK MUSIC]
>> In 1937, a podiatrist named
Doc Noss discovered a cache
of Apache gold on what is now
the White Sands Missile Range
in New Mexico.
Scouting a rocky
outcropping called
Victorio Peak
while deer hunting,
Noss took refuge from a
heavy rainstorm in a cave.
Exploring, he stumbled
upon an old mine shaft
that led him to thousands
of crudely smelted gold bars
stacked in rows like bricks.
Tragically, Noss was never able
to cash in on this treasure
because whilst using
explosives in an attempt
to widen the cave's
opening, he mistakenly
created a landslide that
sealed it forever more.
The legend of Noss's lost gold
gained widespread attention.
Where did the riches he had
seen come from originally?
Theories abound.
From the repository
of a 19th century
Apache war chief to a secret
stash from the Aztecs,
treasure hunters world over
have come to Victorio's Peak
to find Noss's fortune, but
none have been successful.
Many believe the lost
treasure is still
buried somewhere in rubble
and possibly guarded
by the military.
Is it possible ancient treasure
from a lost civilization laid
buried beneath Victorio's Peak?
And if so, what else could
be beneath this strange area?
Researchers like
Gregg Braden point out
that there is more to
this area than gold.
There is actually a much
more ancient system that
stretches over four states.
>> What we found in these
areas, not so much that there is
a hollow space under the desert,
but there is a tunnel system,
a network that connects many
of the indigenous traditions
in this part of the world
from the area in southwestern
Colorado, northern New Mexico,
down towards Wild Horse Mesa.
And it is this natural
system of caverns
that the native people say many
of their traditions relate to.
So they were created naturally
through volcanic environments,
and then they were modified
to become more useful
over later generations.
But what the ancestors
say is that in the past,
this is where people have lived
when the cataclysms of the past
destroyed the
surface of the Earth.
And now, we have
physical evidence
in New Mexico and Colorado.
The geologic evidence does not
support the Hollow Earth theory
in the sense of a complete space
in the center of the Earth.
It does support, within
the crust itself,
a series of tunnels
and catacombs
that were created naturally
and have been known and used
by our ancestors, by
native peoples in the past.
>> It's interesting that we find
this idea of treasures within
the Earth, hidden gold, things
of this nature that actually
tie in with Native
American lore.
For instance, you
have Chicomoztoc--
the seven caves, seven cities
of gold from Aztec stories.
You have to wonder how
much truth there is to it.
At the same time, you
had this whole idea
that goes back to stories of
the underworld contain treasure,
whether it's the
dwarves, or it's
the alchemists looking for gold
in the depths of the Earth.
>> These sites are very
controversial because they
force historians to rethink
the traditional story.
>> Could this be true?
Many of these underground
caverns in North America
are located in the
Four Corners region
where Colorado, Utah,
Arizona, and New Mexico meet.
This rugged and arid
geographic land,
also known as the
Colorado Plateau,
is predominantly owned by
Native American tribes including
the Hopi Nation.
In Hopi folklore, it is written
that the Indians' ancestors
climb onto the surface of
our Earth from an underworld.
This indigenous tribe believes
that the current incarnation
of mankind is the fourth
world and that the prior three
occurred inside the Earth.
>> What's intriguing about the
Hopi tradition is the notion
of previous cycles of
civilization that comes across
which are brought to
an end cataclysmically.
And then there's a
re-emergence, and another cycle
of civilization occurs.
That's the message that I
take from the Hopi traditions,
that they are urging us
to cast our minds back
into remote prehistory.
And they are saying we
are not recent comers.
We lived through a
series of cataclysms,
and we remade the Earth each
time after those cataclysms.
When you look at the
actual structures
on the ground in
that area, if you
go to Chaco Canyon
or places like this,
that there's the
suggestion that we're just
looking at the tip
of the iceberg,
and that there's a much older
heritage behind all of this.
>> If this, indeed, is just the
tip of the iceberg to something
far more mysterious, what other
evidence could suggest that
there is an unseen
power in this area?
Freddy Silva brings us to
another location in the Four
Corners called Shiprock.
>> I've seen grown men weep
at the sight of Shiprock,
or if you want to call
it by its real name--
Tsé Bit a' i.
And it's one of the most
powerful places on Earth
for a number of reasons.
One, it's described as
a "navel of the Earth."
And any place called
the navel of the Earth
is essentially a power point,
as you'd expect from a navel.
And it's a place of beginning
where the Anasazi are
said to, and I quote, "land here
from Venus on a metal bird."
And when the bird recognized
that the people were safe,
the bird went into the ground
and rose up as Shiprock.
You can see it for about
60 miles in any direction.
It's a sacred spot.
We should respect that.
It's one of those
few places on Earth
where I feel I can actually hear
the braves singing and dancing
around me and actually join in.
It sounds like the
craziest thing,
but the energy is so
unadulterated, so powerful,
so potent, it doesn't have
to show it, it is itself.
And you are suddenly reminded
that you are actually
crossing a veil.
It's hard to put into words
unless you've experienced this,
but that's the power
of a place like that.
>> Could this
"navel of the Earth"
be a place where people
could cross over into other
dimensions?
>> When it comes to exploring
Native American lore
and, in particular, legends
about the underworld,
the Four Corners area is
particularly important
because we have a number of
Native American groups that
claim to have emerged there.
And by that, I mean
they have an emergence
myth that says that they
came out of the Earth.
The Pueblo people
believed that they
had come out of the
Earth in that area
around the Grand Canyon area.
We have the Hopi who
claim they came out
of what they call the
sipapu, which is basically
the name for a hole as part of
their chimney system in a kiva.
But they claim that they
had come in something
they called the sipapu.
And they came out
of the underworld
where they had interacted with
reptilian humanoids called
the Snake People and
the Lizard People.
And they had also interacted
with another group
called the Ant People.
The Ant People are
described, basically,
in a way that sounds very much
like so-called descriptions
of modern day gray aliens.
We have this whole idea here
that there's a series of worlds
beneath, and they all have
their own inhabitants,
and that these Native
American people said
they had come up through
these various regions
to eventually
emerge in our world.
We have the Apache who
have a similar legend that
says they came through a
series of caverns to our world
after they lived in a place
called the Old Fire Land, which
had been destroyed
in the cataclysm
and had sunk beneath the ocean.
And they claim that
they had come here
through a series of caverns
just as the Aztecs said.
We also have the Navajo.
And the Navajo believe that
they came out of the underworld
as well.
So these are themes that all
tie into the Four Corners area.
And it's very interesting
that the various people--
some of them were even
adversaries in previous
centuries--
that they all have
similar legends
about worlds within our world.
>> If the premise that modern
mankind originated from caverns
deep below the Earth is true,
then is it also possible that
there are entire civilizations
still living underground
in the Four Corners region?
>> I live near Taos, New Mexico.
And there is a phenomenon that
is called the Hum, the "Taos
Hum," H-U-M. It is a vibration
that is felt, selectively,
by some people.
Other people don't
seem to know it at all.
It usually happens between 2
and 4 AM when a lot of people
are sleeping.
And the hum, it's
right on the verge
of where you feel
it in your heart
and where you can just
below the audible level.
And no one knows where
this hum is coming from.
They brought in university
researchers back in the 1980s
to try to triangulate where.
If they could find
three locations
where they found the
hum and triangulate,
they could find the source.
And what they found was that
it's coming from everywhere,
suggesting that there
is a vibration happening
within the Earth during
those periods of time--
2, 3, 4 AM--
that is being carried
through the bedrock
into these other areas.
What is the source
of that vibration?
This is where the
speculation comes in
that these natural
tunnels and the caves
and the caverns that our
ancestors have talked
about in the past
that already exist
are being modified, perhaps, and
used in modern ways for storage
for Earth-sensing, geo-sensing
applications, and things
like that.
So that is where scientific
community kind of has arrived
is that there is something.
And they think maybe it is the
drilling, the constant drilling
to modify these caverns
that's creating the vibration.
>> Since 1946, the US government
has been using Hopi land
in the Four Corners region
for explosive testing.
Is it possible that, in fact,
these tests are a cover-up?
Could the military be
using the ancient power
of this area to run
covert military programs?
Or could their true agenda
be to destroy something
that was discovered
underground, perhaps something
from an ancient galaxy?
Billy Carson entails
his personal encounter
at the Four Corners area.
>> It appears that a lot of
this activity in a lot of these
tunnels congregate close
to this Four Corners area.
Now, there's well-known
stone-based stargates is
what the ancient
Indians call them,
and now the modern
Indians say the same.
These are where
their relatives used
to go and put their heads in
and actually chant some words
and disappear.
And then some of
them were returned.
Last summer, I went to Arizona
to see the Grand Canyon.
We actually hired a helicopter
and a guy to go down there,
because I wanted
to find out if I
can see any of these
ancient mysteries
that people have
been talking about.
And we landed on this
Indian reservation
down inside the canyon.
And there's a special
area that was corded off.
So I said to the guy, I said,
why can't I come over here?
I don't understand.
I don't see anything dangerous.
He said because NASA has taken
over this part of the Canyon.
The way the grid system
runs across the Earth,
there are several
places that are just
like heavily energetic nodes.
You'll find on many
of these reservations,
and other holy lands
held by Natives,
that military
groups have gone in
and built facilities and
made them off limits.
Most of the time, these
are actual entrances
to this cavern system that
honeycombs the entire Earth.
A lot of these places
are sacred to natives
because they have
stories going back
many millennia of different
types of beings taking them
below the Earth before
cataclysms to protect them.
And these are the same things
that after the cataclysm
would bring them back to
the surface of the Earth
to help them set up their
civilizations again.
A lot of these areas that
the military will lock down
are also very strong
vortexes, which,
basically, are nodes in this
cosmic web stargate system.
These are places that
the military locked down
because they don't want you
to see what's coming and going
through these gates.
>> A lockdown?
If this is true, who
or what could possibly
be traveling through these
gates or in these underground
caverns?
Perhaps we should
consider one of the less
conventional theories
of evolution.
If it is possible that
the DNA of human beings
was originally bioengineered
by ancient extraterrestrials,
could this be a link?
William Bramley points
out how this idea
is explained in Hopi folklore.
>> You have this possibility
at least within the lore.
You don't necessarily exclude
sky-born gods from gods that
lived underground because
people had both ideas--
that the gods had realms
underground, underwater,
and in the sky, and they
interacted with all of them.
We already know there were very
large caverns here and there.
It may be, for example,
that the South American
tribe, maybe the Hopi maybe,
they found some of these
at one time.
Or, at least, they
found caverns big enough
where they believe that some of
these things could transpire.
So it's not necessarily
a contradiction.
It just means that
the gods operated
in these different realms.
>> When we look at the
creation stories of our past,
as different as they
are from one another,
there are common themes that
weave them all together.
I find this fascinating because
it is the local understanding
of a common heritage,
I believe, that
is preserved in the traditions
of the modern indigenous
peoples.
One of the most obvious
of these common threads
is the theme of another
world beneath this one,
a subterranean world from
which our ancestors emerged.
>> A lot of these themes from
Native American folklore have
found their way into modern day
accounts of what I call modern
folklore, which would be
ufology, cryptozoology,
all these types of things,
conspiracy literature.
Really, all this stuff is
just an update of folklore.
It's the same stuff that
people have done for centuries.
Sometimes, it contains truth.
Sometimes, it
contains fabrications.
Sometimes, people
elaborate on what
they think something means.
But we see these
ideas of underworlds
involved with a variety of
peoples around the world.
Now, emerging in these same
areas, all these things
touch on the same
type of material.
>> With these subterranean
creation stories of the world
from which our ancestors
emerged, is there, perhaps,
a code or a treasure that could
have been left for us to figure
out the truth of humanity's
connections to the Four
Corners?
>> New Mexico, Arizona, the
whole area around the Four
Corners, and Utah, of course,
and southern Colorado,
it's actually one of the
most spiritually active parts
of North America.
And this is why that
part of the Americas so--
it draws so many people.
Some of them might know it.
Some of them don't.
But they are drawn
there, nevertheless.
I think it's because
the land is worked with.
The land is a living organism.
If you work with it, just
like watering a plant,
it gives you something back.
It gives you back
a certain pleasure,
and that's what
you're attracted to.
So that's why that
part of the country
is so important, because
it's still alive.
It's worked with
on a daily basis.
And you can feel that as
you just drive through it.
There is the Navajo sites.
There is Mesa Verde as well.
There is Bandelier.
There's a kiva up
on Bandelier that's
if you happen to go there
at the end of the day,
and time it so you don't get
caught up inside the park,
you have to climb up
a 100-foot ladder.
And that place is
perfectly positioned
inside the natural cave
in a really awkward area
of the park, because
that's the one
spot where the Earth's telluric
currents just happen to cross.
You know, and
they're everywhere.
These currents are everywhere.
But they built this
sacred site exactly where
those currents cross.
And you go inside
the kiva, and you
had this out-of-body
experience, because this energy
is made it the same
stuff that we're made of.
It's literally just
giving you a means
of technology in which to
escape the physical world
and connect to another
level of reality.
>> Gregg Braden takes us
deep into another structure
in the Four Corners area that
may give us an insight into how
this location connects to the
sky and what may lie below.
>> One of the greatest mysteries
that we're finding of ancient
civilization is right
in our own backyard,
for those of us that live
in the United States,
in the high deserts of
northern New Mexico--
Chaco Canyon.
Something happened
in Chaco Canyon
1,100 plus years ago
that we have never
seen in the history
of the world before,
and we never saw it
duplicated since that time.
We still do not
know precisely who
the people were that built Chaco
Canyon, where they came from,
why they had the advanced
technology, why they had
the mathematics, why
they had the astronomy,
the architecture, the ability
to grow food in one of the most
harshest environments.
It's 12 miles long, 2
miles wide in some places.
Within the canyon itself, there
over 2,800 archaeological sites
that have been recognized.
Of those 2,800, 32
have been excavated.
And because they
cannot be sustained,
many of them were reburied
to preserve them for later
generations.
12 are now restored,
and it's those 12
that are telling the
story that is opening
the door to forbidden
territory when
it comes to archaeology,
advanced civilizations
of our past.
One of the most notable
places in Chaco Canyon
is Pueblo Bonito.
It is a very unique D-shaped
architectural complex.
Over 900 rooms were built
into this Pueblo Bonito.
Some of them are square.
Some of them are the
circular chambers,
the kivas that play
such a significant role
in the traditions of the Native
peoples throughout the desert
southwest.
And one of the reasons that
this circular chamber is
so important is because
it ties directly
into their creation story.
In the circular
chambers, in the kivas,
there is a place at one end
of the cave called the sipapu.
And the sipapu, in
the Native traditions,
is where our ancestors from the
past emerged from another world
beneath this world.
They emerge into this
world time and time again.
This ties in beautifully to
some of the creation stories
that we find
everywhere from Sumeria
to the Mesoamerican
traditions in the Yucatan.
There is a common
theme that runs
through all of these stories.
And that common theme
is that the people
emerge from a world
that is underneath.
It is below the world
that we know now.
>> Is this yet another reference
to human creation beneath
the surface?
What might be Chaco Canyon's
connection to the stars?
>> When the Viking missions
began sending back the images
from Mars, over 19,000 images
from the orbiter as it was
circling.
And as those images
now have been refined,
and we have a better sense of
what they are, lo and behold,
there is on the surface
of Mars a temple complex
that looks precisely like
an unexcavated Pueblo
Bonito in Chaco Canyon, a
very unique D-shaped structure
that we find nowhere else
on this planet in the past.
It's nothing that we
find contemporary.
The only other place we find
an example of the structure
is on the surface of Mars.
Now, the people of Chaco Canyon,
we don't know, as I mentioned,
precisely who they are.
But we know that
they had an advanced
understanding of physics, of
astronomy, and mathematics.
There's a place in Chaco,
a 400-foot-tall butte
called Fajada Butte.
And at the top of Fajada Butte
is a mysterious structure
that scientists are now calling
the North American Stonehenge.
Now, you wouldn't
necessarily know
that to look at it because there
are three vertical slabs made
of the same material
as the native Earth.
In the 1970s, it was
recognized that on the solstice
and on the equinox, the way the
sun comes and the light shines
through these slabs
against a spiral design
on the wall at the
back of the slabs,
it actually pinpoints
precisely the summer
solstice and the equinox
as well as lunar cycles.
And this was something that
has never been seen before.
It's so rare that
scientists were
reluctant to even embrace
the possibility that it
was actually happening.
And it was only when
laser-guided imagery
was used to mimic the
solstices and the equinoxes
at different times of year that
science were able to pinpoint
precisely that,
yes, this is what
was happening on Fajada Butte.
>> If the Four Corners area
hold some kind of power beneath
the Earth that humans
might have emerged from,
is it possible that the
inhabitants of Chaco Canyon
built these locations to connect
with an ancient space-faring
race beyond Earth?
>> What the scientists found
was that from Chaco Canyon were
a series of roads that radiate
in perfect lines from Chaco
into other archaeological sites
like Hovenweep and Mesa Verde,
for example, and the
Aztec National Monument.
Perfect lines,
perfect roads, when
they reached a rock or a boulder
in the middle of the road,
they didn't go around,
they went right up over.
They're absolutely perfect.
And part of the reason
this is a mystery
is because these
people had no wheels.
What were they using-- a perfect
road, absolutely straight,
36-inches wide with no
wheels in their culture--
what were they using
these roads for?
This is one of the mysteries
that the scientists
are looking at now, because it
appears that Chaco was never
inhabited to the full extent
that it could have been.
It had the ability to sustain
thousands and thousands
of people, but
there's no evidence
that those thousands of
people ever lived there.
So now, the thinking is
that it was a gathering
place during very
specific times that
were predicted and calculated
by Fajada Butte where
people from the other traditions
would converge on Chaco using
these roads.
And many of the astronomical
images that we're seeing now
link Chaco to what we
see happening in Venus,
what we see happening on Mars.
So it's very possible that what
we're seeing in Chaco Canyon
is an example of an
advanced technology using
the materials that are
available in this world
to mimic and
duplicate a knowledge
and a wisdom that has been known
from somewhere in the past.
>> Could Chaco Canyon be
mimicking something more
ancient than we know today?
Andrew Collins suggests
that the ancient people
were following a pathway
of the skies that
would lead them home.
Is it possible
these ancient people
had a different understanding
of their existence here?
>> The soul comes
from, let's say,
the sky world up there somewhere
and returns there at the point
of death.
But there's something
more beyond that,
that some part of us comes
from the stars themselves.
And that the point of
incarnation, that something--
we call it the soul
or the spirit--
embodies within flesh
and blood and exists.
And that this gives
us this connection
to the stars that the
soul or spirit actually
comes from an extraterrestrial
or a starry source.
And that when we're released
at the point of death,
it goes back from
whence it came.
But in connection with
this were various stars
that were seen as
personification of influences
and intelligences that were
either markers on that route
to reach the sky world
or helped or enabled
the soul as supernatural
beings to achieve that aim.
There seems to be
a consistent route,
and that route would seem
to have been symbolically,
at least, and maybe in
actuality in some manner,
connected with the Milky
Way, what we can see
of the edge of the Milky Way--
this bright, beautiful,
starry stream
that comes up from the
horizon, arches over our heads,
down to the other horizon,
something that we barely
perceive today living
in urban environments,
for the most part.
But if you go to remote parts
of the world in its totality.
And it's beautiful.
And you don't understand
just how important
this would have been
to our ancestors
seeing something like this
rising up into the sky.
And the ancestors believed
that this was the route.
They called it the
"path of souls"
in Native American tradition.
>> If these ancient people
did have this knowledge,
how is this connected to
what might lie below the Four
Corners?
>> Breakaway civilizations
or things of that nature,
the ancient civilizations
like pre-Adamites.
You know, if these
beings created
a high level of civilization
before we did and may,
long ago, have reached
quantum computing levels
even using the crystaline
structure of the Earth itself
to achieve godlike powers.
And hence, they
became "the gods"
to a lot of ancient people.
So when you look at
these ancient beings that
are described in
the ancient text,
and you look at the
modern-day UFO accounts,
you're probably really
looking at the same beings.
But that does not
mean that they're
coming from across the galaxy.
There's a good bit of
evidence that the Earth
has been bombarded
by various cataclysms
over the ages, everything
from asteroid impact
to solar events.
When these things
happen, civilizations
that might be on the surface
are going to be devastated.
There's really no
way around this.
I mean, if you don't
know it's coming,
then the effect on
your civilization
is going to be catastrophic.
We find this again
and again in stories
about these ancient beings who
preceded us here on the planet
and who may still
actually be here.
Richard Shaver, who is
the creator of something
called the Shaver
Mystery, he said
that these beings
fled underground
when the radiation coming
from the sun became so deadly.
Whereas, before, they lived
for thousands of years,
they quickly found that
their solar radiation
was destroying their DNA.
And then they fled beneath
the surface of the Earth.
And they and their descendants,
in a greatly modified form
due to other types
of radiation which
were found inside the Earth,
are still there to this day.
That's not to say
that you wouldn't
have to have a really
advanced level of not just
civilization, but
technology in order
to carve out a space inside
the crust of the planet
and to make a sustainable
environment there.
And, of course, there
are elements there
that which could provide this.
>> Sonja Grace uses her
alternative research to dive
even deeper into the
layers of the Four Corners.
>> So I went back in time and
spirit-traveled to an ancient
site that my guides took
me to called Chaco Canyon.
It's in the Four Corners
of the Southwest.
The Savrock immediately
ushered us in inside the rocks.
There was like an opening,
and we went inside.
And they said, we want to show
you this because this is what
happened to the Anasazi people.
We took them through
this underground tunnel.
And we literally
returned the people
that we could to the
very place that they
began before they
migrated north,
which was to the Mayan culture.
The Savrock helped the Mayan
people long time before that.
The whole migration
story of the Hopis
where they migrated
in four directions
came out of an ancient
culture down in Mexico.
And this was very
interesting that the Savrock
would intervene and help
some of these people
back to this place.
It's how they
actually disappeared.
The rest of them disappeared
because the Annunaki also
came and took several of these
people, hundreds of them,
from the Anasazi community.
This site and all
of the Southwest
is filled with portals.
There's all kinds of energy
going on there, especially
extraterrestrial energy.
There's all kinds of
energy in the Southwest.
>> Could it be that what Doc
Noss apparently stumbled across
was ancient treasure from
some of these cultures as they
survived cataclysms?
Is it possible that the
Four Corners area holds
a certain kind of
energy that opens up
doorways to other worlds?
If this is true, how are Mayans
and ancient cultures in Mexico
attached to this area in
the American Southwest?
>> The foundation of
the Aztec nation, now,
that location was
known as Chicomoztoc.
That means the seven
caves, and this
was like some kind of
subterranean structure.
One of them has them coming
from a place called Atzlán.
And this is suggested
to be somewhere
in the Southwest United States.
>> Could the mysterious Four
Corners be linked to more
ancient cultures
that migrated south?
Could this have been the
location of the creation story
for the Aztecs?
Up next, the code continues
to unravel as we head
south of the border to Mexico.
[MUSIC PLAYING]